About the Author
Mark Lutz
 is the author of Python’s classic and foundational texts, a former
trainer with two decades of experience teaching Python to newcomers, and one
of the people responsible for the prominence that Python enjoys today.
Mark wrote the three O’Reilly books 
Learning Python
, 
Programming Python
,
and 
Python Pocket 
Reference
, all currently in fourth, fifth, or sixth editions. He
has been using and promoting Python since 1992, started writing Python books
in 1995, and began teaching Python classes in 1997.
All told, Mark has taught thousands of learners live and in person, and his
published works span 12k pages among 15 books that cover Pythons 1.X
through 3.X. He also has BS and MS degrees in computer science, work
experience in compilers and other domains, and a current interest in Python-
coded apps that run on both PCs and phones.
For more author background, see Mark’s books-and-software website, 
learning-
python.com
.

Colophon
The animal on the cover of 
Learning Python
, sixth edition, is a wood rat
(
Neotoma muridae
). The wood rat lives in a wide range of conditions (mostly
rocky, scrub, and desert areas) over much of North and Central America,
generally at some distance from humans. Wood rats are good climbers, nesting
in trees or bushes up to six meters off the ground; some species burrow
underground or in rock crevices or inhabit other species’ abandoned holes.
These grayish-beige, medium-size rodents are the original pack rats: they carry
anything and everything into their homes, whether or not it’s needed, and are
especially attracted to shiny objects such as tin cans, glass, and silverware.
Many of the animals on O’Reilly covers are endangered; all of them are
important to the world.
The cover illustration is by Karen Montgomery, based on a 19th-century
engraving from 
Cuvier’s Animals
. The series design is by Edie Freedman, Ellie
Volckhausen, and Karen Montgomery. The cover fonts are Gilroy Semibold and
Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion Pro; the heading font is Adobe
Myriad Condensed; and the code font is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.