Chapter 1. 
A Python Q&A Session
If you’re reading this book, you may already know what Python is and why it’s
an important tool to learn. If you don’t, you probably won’t be sold on Python
until you’ve learned the language by reading the rest of this book and have done
a project or two. But before we jump into details, this first chapter will briefly
introduce some of the main reasons behind Python’s popularity and begin
sculpting a definition of the language. This takes the form of a question-and-
answer session, which addresses some of the most common queries posed by
beginners—like you.
Why Do People Use Python?
Because there are many programming languages to choose from, this is the usual
first question of newcomers and a great place to start. Given that millions of
people use Python today, there really is no way to answer this question with
complete accuracy; the choice of development tools is often based on unique
constraints or personal preference.
But after teaching Python to hundreds of groups and thousands of students, some
common themes have emerged. The primary factors cited by Python users seem
to be these:
Software quality
For many, Python’s focus on 
readability, coherence, and software quality in
general sets it apart from other tools in the programing world. Python code is
designed to be 
readable
, and hence reusable and maintainable—much more
so than traditional scripting languages. The uniformity of Python code makes
it relatively easy to understand, even if you did not write it. In addition,
Python has deep support for more advanced 
software reuse
 mechanisms,
such as object-oriented (OO) and functional programming, that can further

promote code quality.
Developer productivity
Python boosts developer productivity 
many times beyond compiled or
statically typed languages. As one measure of this, Python code is typically
one-third to one-fifth
 the size of equivalent C++ or Java code. That means
there is less to type, less to debug, and less to maintain after the fact. Most
Python programs also run immediately, without the lengthy compile and link
steps required by some other tools, further boosting programmer speed.
Program portability
Python programs generally run 
unchanged on 
all major computer platforms
.
Porting a Python program between Linux and Windows, for example, is
often just a matter of copying its code between machines. Moreover, Python
offers multiple options for coding portable graphical user interfaces, database
access programs, web-based systems, and more. Even operating system
interfaces as proprietary as program launches and directory processing are as
portable in Python as they can possibly be.
Application support
Python comes with a large collection 
of prebuilt and portable functionality,
known as the 
standard library
. This library supports an array of application-
level programming tasks, from text pattern matching to network scripting. In
addition, Python can be extended with both homegrown libraries and a vast
collection of third-party software. As covered 
ahead, Python’s 
third-party
domain
 offers tools for website construction, numeric programming, AI, and
much more. The NumPy extension, for instance, has elevated Python to a
core tool in science, technology, engineering, and math (
STEM
), and Django

and PyTorch have done similar for the web and AI.
Component integration
Python scripts can communicate with 
other parts of an application using a
variety of integration mechanisms. Such integrations allow Python to be used
as a product 
customization and extension
 tool. For instance, Python code can
invoke compiled libraries and be run by compiled programs, interact with
other components over networks, and use Android and iOS toolkits on
smartphones. In fact, many Python core tools, including files, ultimately use
precoded interfaces to system libraries; even if your program is all Python,
it’s not standalone.
Love of craft
Because of Python’s ease of use and built-in toolset, it can make the act of
programming 
more pleasure than chore
. Although this benefit is intangible
and subjective, its effect on productivity is an important asset. People do get
paid for coding Python, but many use it just for 
fun
—a testimonial rare in the
software field.
Of these factors, the first two—quality and productivity—are probably the most
compelling benefits to most Python users; let’s take a closer look at each.
Software Quality
By design, Python has a deliberately 
simple and readable syntax and a highly
consistent programming model. As a slogan at an early Python conference
attested, the net result is that Python seems to 
fit your brain
—that is, features of
the language interact in consistent and limited ways and follow naturally from a
small set of core concepts. This makes the language easier to learn, understand,
and remember. In practice, Python programmers do not need to constantly refer
to manuals when reading or writing code; it generally just makes sense.

By philosophy, Python 
adopts a somewhat minimalist mindset. This means that
although there are usually multiple ways to accomplish a coding task, there is
usually just one obvious way, a few less obvious alternatives, and a small set of
coherent interactions throughout. Moreover, Python usually doesn’t make
arbitrary decisions for you; when interactions are ambiguous, explicit
intervention is preferred over “magic.” In the Python way of thinking, explicit is
better than implicit, and simple is better than complex.
Beyond such design themes, Python includes tools such as modules and object-
oriented programming (OOP) that naturally promote code reusability in skilled
hands of the sort you’re about to acquire. And because Python is focused on
quality, most Python programmers naturally are too; this can be a crucial
advantage when it’s time to use someone else’s Python code.
Developer Productivity
If you’ve worked in the software 
field, you know that it can be a dynamic and
bumpy ride. During the great internet boom of the mid-to-late 1990s, it was
difficult to find enough programmers to implement software projects; developers
were asked to implement systems as fast as the internet evolved. In later eras of
economic recession and layoffs, the picture shifted; programming staffs were
often asked to accomplish the same tasks with even fewer people.
In both of these scenarios, Python has shined as a tool that allows programmers
to get more done with less effort. It is explicitly optimized for 
speed of
development
—its simple syntax, dynamic typing, lack of compile steps, and
built-in toolset allow programmers to develop programs in a fraction of the time
needed when using some other tools.
The net effect is that Python typically increases developer productivity many
times beyond the levels supported by traditional languages and often makes the
impossible possible. That’s good news in both boom and bust times, and
everywhere the software industry goes in between.
Is Python a “Scripting Language”?
Maybe. Python is often applied in 
scripting roles, but not always. It’s regularly

called an 
object-oriented scripting language
—a definition 
that blends support
for OOP with an orientation toward scripting contexts, but this may be too
narrow and dismissive. If pressed for a one-liner, Python is probably better
known as:
A general-purpose programming language that blends procedural, functional,
and object-oriented paradigms and accelerates software development by
reducing complexity.
That may not fit on a t-shirt quite as well, but it captures both the richness and
scope of today’s Python.
Nevertheless, the term 
scripting
 seems to have stuck to Python like glue, perhaps
as a contrast with the larger efforts required by some other tools. For example,
some people use the word “script” instead of “program” to describe a Python
code file, because it seems simpler and less formal to code. More usefully, others
reserve “script” for a top-level file, and “program” for a more sophisticated
multifile application, both of which are common in Python.
Because the term 
scripting language
 has so many different meanings to different
observers, though, some would prefer that it not be applied to Python at all. In
fact, people tend to make three very different assumptions when they hear
Python labeled as such, some of which are more useful than others:
Shell tools
Sometimes when people hear Python 
described as a scripting language, they
think it means that Python is a tool for coding operating-system-oriented
scripts. Such programs are often launched from console command lines and
perform tasks such as processing text files and launching other programs.
As you’ll learn ahead, Python programs can and do serve such roles, but this
is just one of dozens of common Python application domains. It is not just a
better shell-script language.
Control language
To others, scripting refers to a “glue” layer used 
to control and direct (i.e.,
script) other application components. As noted earlier, Python programs are
indeed often deployed in the context of larger applications. For instance, to

test hardware devices, Python programs may call out to components that give
low-level access to a device or port. Similarly, programs may run bits of
Python code at strategic points to support end-user product customization
without the need to ship and recompile the entire system’s source code.
Python’s simplicity makes it a naturally flexible control tool. Technically,
though, this is also just a common Python role; many (and perhaps most)
Python programmers code standalone scripts without ever using or knowing
about any integrated components. It is not just a control language.
Ease of use
Probably the best use of 
the term 
scripting language
 is to refer to a relatively
simple language used for coding tasks quickly. This is especially true when
the term is applied to Python, which allows much faster program
development than compiled languages like C++ or larger languages like
Java. Its rapid development cycle fosters an exploratory, incremental mode
of programming that has to be experienced to be appreciated.
Don’t be fooled, though—Python is not just for simple tasks. Rather, it
makes tasks simple by its ease of use and flexibility. Python has an
approachable feature set, but it allows programs to scale up in sophistication
as needed. Because of that, it is commonly used for both quick tactical tasks
and longer-term strategic development.
So, is Python a scripting language or not? It depends on whom you ask (and
perhaps when you ask them). In general, the term 
scripting
 is best reserved for
the rapid and flexible mode of development that Python supports, rather than a
particular application domain or limiting label.
On a related note, people also 
sometimes call Python an 
interpreted language
 to
distinguish it from languages like C and C++. While this is also sometimes
meant to pigeonhole, it’s also easier to dismiss: there are many implementations
of Python today, spanning the spectrum from traditional interpreters to
traditional compilers, so “interpreted” doesn’t apply. The clearer distinction may
be that Python is 
dynamically typed
, not statically typed like languages that are
normally compiled. As you’ll soon learn, this accounts for much of the 
power
that Python brings to development tasks.

OK, but What’s the Downside?
The only universally recognized downside to Python that has emerged over its
more than three-decade tenure may also be an inevitable trade-off for its ease of
use: Python’s 
execution speed
 may 
not always be as fast as that of fully compiled
and lower-level languages such as C and C++. Though relatively rare today, you
may still occasionally need to get “closer to the iron” for some tasks by using
languages that are more directly mapped to the underlying hardware.
We’ll talk about implementation concepts in 
Chapter 2
, but in short, the most-
used versions of Python today compile (i.e., translate) source code statements to
an intermediate format known as 
bytecode
 and then interpret the bytecode.
Bytecode provides 
portability, as it is a platform-independent format. However,
because Python is not commonly compiled all the way down to binary 
machine
code
 (e.g., instructions for an Intel or ARM chip in your PC or phone), some
programs will run more slowly in Python than in a fully compiled language like
C.
Whether you will ever 
care
 about this execution speed difference depends on
what kinds of programs you write. Python is regularly optimized, and Python
code runs fast enough by itself in most application domains. Furthermore,
whenever you do something “real” in a Python script, like processing a file or
constructing a graphical user 
interface (
GUI
), your program will actually run at
C speed, because such tasks are immediately dispatched to compiled C code
inside the Python interpreter.
And really, Python’s speed is a bit of a red herring today: in truth, Python 
is
commonly used in domains that require optimal execution speeds. Numeric
programming and computer games, for example, often need at least their core
number-crunching components to run at C speed (or better), but are frequently
coded in Python nevertheless.
There are multiple ways to 
achieve speed in Python when it counts. For instance,
systems such as 
PyPy
 compile bytecode further as your program runs; 
Cython
allows you to code in a C-and-Python hybrid that’s compiled in full; and crucial
code can be split off to 
compiled extensions
 linked 
into Python for use in scripts.
As an example, the 
NumPy
 numeric-programming extension combines compiled
and optimized libraries with the Python language, and in the process turns

Python into 
a numeric programming tool that is simultaneously efficient and
easy to use. Indeed, NumPy Python code regularly achieves speed parity with
Fortran and C++, without their added complexities.
More fundamentally, though, execution speed is not the only priority in most
software development. Python’s 
speed-of-development
 gain is often far more
important than any speed-of-execution loss, especially given modern computer
speeds—and modern computer deadlines. Naturally, Python has other 
potential
downsides, including its frequent changes and convolutions, but these are
subjective calls best made after you’ve had a chance to vet them in this book.
Who Uses Python Today?
Because Python is a free and open 
source software (
FOSS
) tool, 
an accurate
count of its user base is impossible—there are no license registrations to tally.
Moreover, Python has been automatically included with countless Linux
distributions, Macintosh computers, and a wide range of products and hardware,
further clouding the user-base picture.
In general, though, Python enjoys a very large user base and an active developer
community. It is generally considered to be among the 
top 5
 most widely used
programming languages in the world today (and for true sports fans, often
weighs in at #1). Because Python has been broadly used for 
over three decades
,
it’s also very stable and robust.
Because of all this, Python is regularly applied in real revenue-generating
products by real 
companies
. While user lists are prone to change, a list of notable
and known companies using Python today reads like a who’s who of the
software field: Google, Intel, Disney, YouTube, Industrial Light & Magic, Red
Hat, NASA, Eve Online, Seagate, JPL, Hewlett-Packard, JP Morgan Chase,
Dropbox, ESRI, Instagram, Spotify, Pinterest, Reddit, Microsoft, Netflix, and
many more.
More broadly, Python is deployed by most organizations developing software
today in either strategic or tactical roles and regularly serves as the tool of choice
in computer science education. It’s not just for one thing, it’s for everything.
For a sampling of additional Python users and applications that’s hopefully more

up to date than a book can ever be, try the following pages at Python’s site:
Python Success Stories
, 
Applications for Python
, and 
Quotes about Python
. As
usual, you may also be able to uncover other Python roles of interest with a web
search in your local browser or app.
What Can I Do with Python?
Commercial applications may 
be compelling, but people also use Python for all
sorts of real-world, day-in/day-out tasks, whether for profit, need, hobby, or fun.
In fact, as a general-purpose language, Python’s roles are virtually unlimited:
you can use it for everything from gaming and website development to robotics
and content management.
That said, Python roles seem to fall into a few broad categories. The next few
sections survey some of Python’s most common application domains today, as
well as prominent tools used in each domain.
Two notes up front: first, we won’t be able to explore these tools in any depth
either here or in this book at large. NumPy and Django, for example, are book-
length topics on their own, and our goal in this book is to learn the 
Python
 code
you will be writing to use systems like these. Second, apologies in advance to
the many other tools omitted here only for space; if you are interested in any of
the following topics, please search online for more tools and resources.
Systems Programming
Python’s built-in interfaces to operating-system 
services make it ideal for writing
portable and maintainable system-administration utilities—sometimes called
shell
 or 
command-line
 tools, though they may be used in numerous ways. Python
programs can search files and directory trees, launch and configure other
programs, do parallel processing with processes, threads, and coroutines, and
more.
Python’s standard library comes 
with Portable Operating System Interface
(
POSIX)
 bindings and support for all the usual OS tools, including environment
variables, files, sockets, pipes, processes, threads, regular-expression pattern
matching, command-line arguments, standard-stream interfaces, shell-command

launchers, filename expansion, ZIP file utilities, and XML, JSON, and CSV
parsers. In addition, the bulk of Python’s system interfaces are designed to be
portable; for example, a script that copies directory trees typically runs
unchanged on all platforms that host Python.
GUIs and UIs
Python’s simplicity and rapid turnaround 
also make it a good match for GUI
programming on devices of all kinds. For instance, Python comes with a
standard object-oriented interface to the Tk GUI toolkit called 
Tkinter
 (and
tkinter
 in code), which allows Python programs to implement portable GUIs
with a native look and feel. Python/Tkinter GUIs run unchanged on Windows,
macOS, and Linux, and on Android with the help of a freeware app today (see
Appendix A
).
In addition, third-party tools offer other 
routes to portable UIs—including both
traditional GUIs like 
Kivy
, 
BeeWare
’s 
Toga
, 
PyQt
, and 
wxPython
; and web-
browser based solutions like 
Django
, 
Flask
, and 
WebAssembly
. If your app, like
most, must interact with users, Python has multiple ways to write once and run
everywhere.
Internet and Web Scripting
Python comes with standard internet 
modules that allow programs to perform a
wide variety of networking tasks, in both client and server modes. Scripts can
communicate over sockets; extract form information sent to server-side CGI web
scripts; transfer files by FTP; parse and generate XML and JSON documents;
compose and send, and receive and parse email; fetch web pages by URLs and
parse their HTML; and more.
In addition, a large collection of third-party tools are available on the web for
doing internet programming in Python. For example, web-development
frameworks, such 
as 
Django
, 
Flask
, 
TurboGears
, and 
Zope
, support construction
of full-featured and production-quality websites with Python. Many of these
include tools like object-relational mappers, server-side scripting and templating,
and AJAX support, to provide complete and enterprise-level web development
solutions. The 
Pyjamas
 Python-to-JavaScript transpiler; the 
Beautiful Soup

HTML content extractor; and the 
WebAssembly
, 
Pyodide
, 
py2wasm
, and
PyScript
 Python-in-the-browser enablers provide even more web possibilities.
Component Integration
We discussed the component integration 
role earlier. Python’s ability to be
extended by and embedded in systems coded in C, C++, and Java makes it useful
as a flexible glue language for scripting the behavior of other software
components. For instance, integrating a C library into Python allows Python to
test and launch the library’s tools, and embedding Python in a product enables
on-site customizations to be coded without having to recompile the entire
product (or ship its source code at all).
Tools such as 
SWIG
, 
Boost.Python
, 
CFFI
, and 
HPy
 automate 
much of the work
needed to link compiled components with Python scripts, and the 
Cython
 system
allows coders to mix Python and C-like code to create compiled extensions.
Other tools provide more ways to script components—including the 
pyjnius
 and
Chaquopy
 Python/Java bridges; 
pywin32
’s support for Windows Component
Object Model (COM); the 
REST
, 
SOAP
, and 
XML-RPC
 cross-network conduits;
and the 
Jython
 Java and 
IronPython
 .NET implementations of Python. In short,
most software components are in scope to Python code.
Database Access
For traditional database demands, there are Python interfaces to all commonly
used relational 
database systems—Oracle, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Informix,
ODBC, SQLite, and more. The Python world has also defined a 
portable
database API
 for accessing SQL database systems from Python scripts, which
looks the same on a variety of underlying database implementations. For basic
program-storage needs, Python comes with built-in support for its own 
pickle
objects, language-agnostic 
JSON
 documents, and the in-process 
SQLite
embedded SQL database engine.
Also for Python 
scripts, 
PyYAML
 parses and emits YAML data; 
ZODB
 and
Durus
 provide object-oriented databases; 
SQLObject
 and 
SQLAlchemy
implement object relational mappers (ORMs), which graft Python classes onto
relational tables; and 
PyMongo
 interfaces to MongoDB, a high-performance

JSON-style document database. Python can also access cloud storage options in
Google’s 
App Engine
, Microsoft’s 
Azure
, and Amazon’s 
AWS
.
Rapid Prototyping
To Python programs, components 
written in Python and C look the same.
Because of this, it’s possible to prototype systems in Python initially, and then
move selected components to a fully compiled language such as C or C++ for
delivery. Because Python doesn’t require a complete rewrite once the prototype
has solidified, the parts of the system that don’t need the efficiency of a
compiled language can remain coded in Python for ease of maintenance and use.
But beware: given the many optimization routes you met earlier, your prototype
may very well be your deliverable.
Numeric and Scientific Programming
Python is also widely used in 
numeric programming—a domain that would not
traditionally have been considered to be in the scope of scripting languages but
has grown to become one of Python’s most compelling use cases. Prominent
here, the 
NumPy
 high-performance 
numeric-programming extension for Python
mentioned earlier includes such advanced tools as an array object, interfaces to
standard mathematical libraries, and much more. By integrating Python with
numeric routines coded in a 
compiled
 language for speed, NumPy turns Python
into a sophisticated yet easy-to-use numeric-programming tool that can often
replace code written in traditional languages like Fortran or C++.
Additional numeric tools often use NumPy as a core component, and add
support for visualization, parallel processing, statistical analysis, and more. For
example, 
SciPy
 provides 
libraries of scientific programming tools; 
pandas
supports data analysis; 
matplotlib
 adds visualization tools; 
Jupyter
 notebooks are
geared toward math workers’ needs; 
Numba
 and 
PyThran
 offer just-in-time (JIT)
and ahead-of-time (AOT) compilers for Python numeric code, respectively; and
the 
Cython
 and 
PyPy
 systems noted earlier can optimize algorithmic code. For
more basic needs, Python itself comes with a statistics module; complex, fixed-
point, and rational math; and other tools you’ll learn about in this book.

And More: AI, Games, Images, QA, Excel, Apps…
Python is commonly applied in far more domains and with far more tools than
can possibly be covered here. For example, it’s also used in:
Artificial 
intelligence (see 
PyTorch
, 
TensorFlow
, and 
Keras
)
Game 
programming (see 
pygame
, 
Panda3D
, and 
Kivy
)
Image and graphics 
processing (see 
Pillow
, 
PyOpenGL
, and 
OpenCV
)
Quality assurance and 
testing (see 
PyTest
, 
unittest
, and 
Selenium
)
Excel 
spreadsheets (see 
xlwings
, 
PyXLL
, and 
Excel
)
Smartphone 
apps (see 
Kivy
, 
BeeWare
, and 
Appendix A
)
Microcontrollers and ports (see 
MicroPython
 and 
PySerial
)
And of course, much more
For links to resources in these and many other fields, try Wikipedia’s Python
software page
; the 
PyPI website
, which hosts extension packages installed by
Python’s 
pip
; and the normal web searches.
Though application domains underscore Python’s practical utility, keep in mind
that many are largely just instances of Python’s component 
integration
 role in
action again. Adding Python as a frontend to libraries of components written in a
compiled language like C makes Python useful for scripting in a wide variety of
roles. As a general-purpose language that supports integration, Python is
broadly, if not 
universally, applicable.
What Are Python’s Technical Strengths?
Naturally, this is a developer’s question. If you don’t already have a
programming background, the terminology in the next few sections may be a bit
baffling—don’t worry, we’ll explore all of these topics in more detail as we
proceed through this book. For both current and future developers, though, here
is a quick rundown of Python’s top technical features. Some have been touched
on earlier, but this section fills in more of the story.

It’s Object-Oriented and Functional
Python is an object-oriented 
language, from the ground up. As you’ll find in this
book, its 
class model
 supports advanced notions such as polymorphism, operator
overloading, and multiple inheritance; yet, in the context of Python’s simple
syntax and typing, OOP is remarkably easy to apply. In fact, if you don’t
understand these terms, you’ll find they are much easier to learn with Python
than with just about any other OOP language available.
Of equal significance, OOP is an 
option
 in Python; you can go far without
having to become an object guru all at once. Much like C++, Python supports
both procedural and object-oriented programming modes. Its object-oriented
tools can be applied if and when constraints allow. This is especially useful in
tactical development modes, which often preclude the design phases that best
utilize OOP’s benefits.
In addition to its original 
procedural
 (statement-based) and 
object-oriented
(class-based) paradigms, Python today has built-in support for 
functional
programming—a set that by most measures includes generators,
comprehensions, closures, maps, decorators, anonymous-function lambdas, and
first-class function objects. As you’ll also learn in this book, these can serve as
both complement and alternative to its OOP tools.
It’s Free and Open
Python is completely free to use and distribute. As with other 
open source
software
, such as Linux and Apache, you can fetch the entire Python system’s
source code for free on the internet. There are no restrictions on copying it,
embedding it in your systems, or shipping it with your products.
But don’t get the wrong idea: “free” doesn’t mean “unsupported.” On the
contrary, Python users have access to numerous online resources that respond to
queries and issues quicker than most commercial software. Moreover, because
Python comes with complete source code, it empowers developers in ways that
closed commercial software cannot. Although studying or changing a
programming language’s implementation code isn’t everyone’s idea of fun, it’s
comforting to know that you can. You’re not dependent on the whims of a
commercial vendor, because the ultimate documentation—
source code
—is at

your disposal as a last resort.
It’s Portable
We touched on portability earlier. The 
standard implementation of Python is
written in portable ANSI C, and compiles and runs on virtually every major
platform currently in use. For example, Python programs run today on
everything from smartphones to supercomputers. As a partial list, Python is
available on Windows and macOS PCs, Linux and Unix workstations and
servers, Android and iOS smartphones and tablets, real-time systems like
VxWorks, Cray supercomputers, IBM mainframes, and more. Moreover, this list
expands regularly; Android and iOS, for example, are gaining official 
python.org
support at this writing.
Like the language 
itself, the 
standard-library
 modules that ship with Python are
designed to be portable across platform boundaries; their file tools, for instance,
remove many or most of the proprietary aspects of storage on some hosts.
Furthermore, Python programs are automatically compiled to portable 
bytecode
,
which runs the same on any platform with a compatible version of Python
installed (more on this in the next chapter), and there are multiple ways to code
portable 
user interfaces
 in Python with traditional GUIs and web-based options
described earlier.
This means that programs that use the Python language, its standard libraries,
and portable extensions run the same on most systems that host a Python
interpreter. Python also supports platform-specific extensions (e.g., 
pywin32
 on
Windows, 
PyObjC
 on macOS, and 
pyjnius
 on Android), but Python itself works
the same everywhere.
It’s Powerful
From a features perspective, Python is something of a hybrid. Its toolset places it
between traditional scripting languages (such as Tcl, Scheme, and Perl) and
systems development languages (such as C, 
C++
, and Java). Python provides all
the simplicity and ease of use of a scripting language, along with more advanced
software-engineering tools typically found in compiled languages. Unlike some
scripting languages, this combination makes Python useful for large-scale

development projects. As a preview, here are some of the main things you’ll find
in Python’s toolbox:
Dynamic typing
Python keeps track of the kinds of 
objects your program uses when it runs,
and doesn’t require complicated type and size declarations in your code. In
fact, as you’ll see in 
Chapter 6
, there is no such thing as a type or variable
declaration anywhere in Python (apart from recent “hinting,” which Python
itself does not use). Because Python code does not constrain data types, it is
also usually automatically applicable to a whole range of objects.
Automatic memory management
Python automatically allocates 
objects and reclaims (“garbage collects”)
them when they are no longer used. As you’ll learn, Python keeps track of
objects in use and the memory they hold, so you don’t have to.
Programming-in-the-large support
For building larger systems, Python includes 
tools such as modules, classes,
and exceptions. These tools allow you to organize systems into components,
use OOP to reuse and customize code, and handle events and errors
gracefully. Python’s functional programming tools, described earlier, meet
some of the same goals.
Built-in object types
Python provides commonly used data 
structures such as lists, dictionaries,
and strings as intrinsic parts of the language. As you’ll see, its built-in
objects are both flexible and easy to use. They can grow and shrink on
demand, can be arbitrarily nested to represent complex information, and are
immune to common memory errors.

Built-in tools
To process all those object types, Python 
comes with powerful and standard
operations, including concatenation (joining collections), slicing (extracting
sections), sorting, mapping, and more.
Library utilities
For more specific tasks, Python also 
comes with a large collection of
precoded library tools that support everything from regular expression
pattern matching to network servers. Once you learn the language itself,
Python’s library tools are where much of the application-level action occurs.
Third-party utilities
Because Python is open source, developers 
are encouraged to contribute
precoded tools that support tasks beyond those supported by its built-ins. On
the Web, you’ll find free support for image processing, numeric
programming, database access, website development, formal testing, and
much more (see 
“What Can I Do with Python?”
).
Despite the array of tools in Python, it retains a noticeably simple syntax and
design. The result is a powerful programming tool with all the usability of a
scripting language.
It’s Mixable
As noted earlier, Python programs can easily be “glued” to components written
in other languages in a variety of ways—both locally and across networks. That
means you can add functionality to the Python system as needed and use Python
programs within other environments or systems.
Mixing Python into systems coded in more demanding languages, for instance,
makes it an easy-to-use frontend language for testing and customization. As also
mentioned earlier, this makes Python good at rapid prototyping too—systems

may be coded in Python first for development speed and later moved to
extensions one piece at a time for execution speed if and when needed.
It’s Relatively Easy to Use
Compared to alternatives like C++, Java, and C#, Python programming seems
astonishingly simple to most 
observers. To run Python code in most contexts,
you simply type it and run it. There are no intermediate compile and link steps,
like those typical for languages such as C or C++. Python executes programs
immediately, which makes for an interactive programming experience and 
rapid
turnaround
 after program changes—in many cases, you can witness the effect of
a program change nearly as fast as you can type it.
Of course, development cycle turnaround is only one aspect of Python’s ease of
use. It also provides a deliberately simple syntax and powerful built-in tools. In
fact, some have gone so far as to call Python 
executable pseudocode
. Because it
eliminates much of the complexity of its contemporaries, Python programs are
simpler, smaller, and more flexible than equivalent programs in other popular
languages.
Which is not to say that Python makes programming a 
no-brainer
. Python also
has convolutions and dark corners that we’ll tackle head-on in this book, and
some of its roles are more rapid than others. Python’s flavor of OOP inheritance,
for example, is much more complicated than it once was, and building
standalone apps or precompiled programs of the sort you’ll meet in the next
chapter can still be slow. Measured by its peers, though, Python is dramatically
more coder friendly.
It’s Relatively Easy to Learn
Finally, this brings us to the point 
of this book: especially when compared to
other widely used programming languages, the core Python language is
remarkably easy to learn. In fact, if you’re already an experienced programmer,
you can expect to be coding small-scale Python programs in a matter of 
days—
though
 you shouldn’t expect to become an expert quite that fast, despite what
you may have heard from marketing departments!
Naturally, mastering any topic as substantial as today’s Python is not trivial, and

we’ll devote the rest of this book to this task. But the investment required to
master Python is worthwhile: in the end, you’ll gain programming skills that
apply to nearly every computer application domain. Moreover, most find
Python’s learning curve to be much gentler than that of other programming tools,
even if that curve is not quite as flat as some content publishers claim.
That’s good news for both professional developers seeking to add the language
to their toolbox, and end users of systems that expose a Python layer for
scripting roles. Today, many systems rely on the fact that people can learn
enough Python to use the system with little or no support. Moreover, Python has
spawned a legion of users who program for need or fun instead of career and
may never require 
full-scale
 software development skills. Although Python has
advanced tools you’ll meet in this book, its core fundamentals are accessible to
beginners and gurus alike.
To see all this for yourself, let’s wrap up this overview and get started coding.

Chapter Summary
And that concludes the “hype” portion of this book. In this chapter, you’ve
explored some of the reasons that people pick Python for their programming
tasks. You’ve also seen how it is applied and looked at a representative sample
of notable users today. This book’s goal is to teach Python, though, not to sell it.
The best way to judge a language is to see it in action, so the rest of this book
focuses entirely on the language details glossed over here.
The next two chapters begin your technical introduction to the language. In
them, you’ll study ways to run Python programs, peek at Python’s execution
model, and learn the basics of module files for saving code. The aim will be to
give you just enough information to run the examples and exercises in the rest of
the book. You won’t really start programming per se until 
Chapter 4
, but make
sure you have a handle on the startup details before moving on.
Test Your Knowledge: Quiz
In this book, we will be closing each chapter with a quick open-book quiz about
the chapter’s coverage to help you review key concepts. The answers for these
quizzes appear immediately after the questions, and you are encouraged to read
the answers once you’ve taken a crack at the questions yourself, as they
sometimes give useful summary context.
In addition to these end-of-chapter quizzes, you’ll find lab 
exercises
 at the end of
each 
part
 of the book, designed to help you start coding Python on your own,
with suggested answers available in an appendix. For now, here’s your first quiz.
Good luck, and be sure to refer back to this chapter’s material as needed.
1
. 
What are the six main reasons that people choose to use Python?
2
. 
Name four notable companies or organizations using Python today.
3
. 
Why might you 
not
 want to use Python in an application?
4
. 
What can you do with Python?

Test Your Knowledge: Answers
How did you do? Here are the suggested answers, though there may be multiple
solutions to some quiz questions. Again, even if you’re sure of your answers,
you’re encouraged to look at the suggestions for additional context. See the
chapter’s coverage for more details if any of these responses don’t make sense to
you.
1
. 
Software quality, developer productivity, program portability, support
libraries, component integration, and simple enjoyment. Of these, the
quality and productivity themes seem to be the main reasons that people
choose to use Python, but enjoyment counts, too, in a field that can be
as challenging as software.
2
. 
Google, Industrial Light & Magic, JPL, ESRI, Instagram, and many
more. Almost every organization doing software development uses
Python in some fashion, whether for long-term strategic product
development or for short-term tactical tasks such as testing and system
administration.
3
. 
Python’s main downside is performance: in its currently most-common
version, at least, it won’t run as quickly as fully compiled languages like
C and C++. On the other hand, it’s quick enough for most applications,
and typical Python code runs at close to C speed anyhow because it
invokes linked-in C code in the interpreter. If speed is critical, compiled
extensions and other tools like Cython are available to optimize the
number-crunching parts of a Python application.
4
. 
You can use Python for nearly anything you can do with a computer,
from website development and gaming to AI and spacecraft control.
Numeric programming and web development may lead the pack today,
though probably because those are some of the main things for which
computers are used.