Chapter 2. 
How Python Runs
Programs
This chapter and the next cover program execution—how you launch code and
how Python runs it. In this chapter, we’ll begin by studying how the Python
interpreter executes programs in general, from an abstract vantage point. With
that perspective in hand, 
Chapter 3
 will dive into the nuts and bolts of getting
your own programs up and running.
Startup details are inherently platform specific, and some of the material in these
two chapters may not apply to the ways you’ll be using Python, so you should
feel free to skip parts not relevant to your goals. Likewise, readers who have
used similar tools in the past and prefer to get to the meat of the language
quickly may want to file some of these chapters away for future reference. For
the rest of us, let’s take a brief look at the way that Python will run our code,
before we get into the details of writing or 
running it
.
Introducing the Python Interpreter
So far, we’ve mostly been talking about Python as 
a programming language. In
its most widely used form, though, it’s also a software system called an
interpreter
. An interpreter is a kind of program that executes other programs.
When you write a Python program, the Python interpreter reads your program
and carries out the instructions it contains. In effect, the interpreter is a layer of
logic between your code and the computer hardware on your machine.
When Python is installed, it generates a number of components—minimally, an
interpreter and a support library. Depending on how you use it, the Python
interpreter may take the form of an executable program, or a set of libraries
linked into another program. Depending on which flavor of Python you run, the
interpreter itself may be implemented as a C program, a set of Java classes, or
something else. Whatever form it takes, the Python code you write must always
be run by this interpreter. And to enable that, you usually must install a Python

interpreter on your computer.
You don’t need to install Python at this point unless you want to work along with
the sole trivial example coming up, and this book won’t assume that you’ve got a
Python ready to go until the next chapter. When you’re ready, Python installation
details vary by platform and are discussed briefly in 
Chapter 3
, and covered in
full in 
Appendix A
.
Program Execution
What it means to run a Python script depends on whether you look at this task as
a programmer, or as a Python interpreter. Both views offer important
perspectives on Python programming.
The Programmer’s View
In its simplest but most common form, a Python 
program is just a text file
containing Python statements. For example, the file listed in 
Example 2-1
,
named 
script0.py
, may be one of the most trivial Python scripts one could dream
up, but it passes for a fully functional Python program.
Example 2-1. 
script0.py
print('hello world')
print(2 ** 100)
This file contains 
two Python 
print
 statements, which simply print a string (the
text in quotes) and a numeric expression result (2 to the power 100) to the output
stream (the GUI or window where the file is run, normally). Don’t worry about
the syntax of this code yet—for now, we’re interested only in how it runs. This
book will explain the 
print
 statement, and why you can raise 2 to the power 100
so easily in Python, in its later chapters.
You can create such a file of statements with any text editor you like; see
Appendix A
 for suggestions. By convention, Python 
program files are given
names that end in 
.py
; technically, this naming scheme is required only for files
that are “imported”—a term clarified in the next chapter—but most Python files
have 
.py
 names for consistency.
After you’ve typed these statements into a text file, you must tell Python to

execute
 the file—which simply means to run all the statements in the file from
top to bottom, one after another. As you’ll see in the next chapter, you can
launch Python program files by typing command lines, by clicking their icons,
from within coding GUIs, and with other techniques. If all goes well, when you
execute the file, you’ll see the results of the two 
print
 statements show up
somewhere on your computer—usually and by default, in the same window you
were in when you ran the program:
hello world
1267650600228229401496703205376
For example, here’s what happened when this script was run in a Command
Prompt window with a command line on a Windows laptop, to make sure it
didn’t have any silly typos:
C:\Users\me\code> 
py script0.py
hello world
1267650600228229401496703205376
See 
Chapter 3
 for the full story on this process, especially if you’re new to
programming; we’ll get into all the details of writing and launching programs
there. For our purposes here, we’ve just run a Python script that prints a string
and a number. We probably won’t attract venture capital or go viral on GitHub
with this code, but it’s enough to capture the basics of program execution.
Python’s View
The brief description in the prior section is fairly standard for scripting
languages, and it’s usually all that most new Python programmers need to know.
You type code into text files, and you run those files through the interpreter.
Under the hood, though, a bit more happens when you tell Python to “go.”
Although knowledge of Python internals is not strictly required for Python
programming, having a basic understanding of Python’s runtime structure up
front can help you grasp how your code fits into the bigger picture of program
execution.
When you instruct Python to run your script, there are a few steps that Python
carries out before your code actually starts crunching away. Specifically, it’s first

compiled to something 
called “bytecode” and then routed to something called a
“virtual machine.” This holds true only for the most common version of Python,
and you’ll meet variations on this model in a moment. Since the most common
is, well, most common, let’s see how this works first.
Bytecode compilation
Internally, and almost completely 
hidden from you, when you execute a program
Python first compiles your 
source code
 (the statements in your text file) into a
format known as 
bytecode
. Compilation is simply a translation step, and
bytecode is a lower-level, platform-independent representation of your source
code. Roughly, Python translates each of your source statements into a group of
bytecode instructions by decomposing them into individual steps. This bytecode
translation is performed to speed execution—bytecode can be run much more
quickly than the original source code statements in your text file.
You’ll notice that the prior paragraph said that this is 
almost
 completely hidden
from you. If the Python program has write access on your machine, it will save
the bytecode of your programs in files that end with a 
.pyc
 extension (
.pyc
 means
.py
 source, compiled). Technically, this save doesn’t happen when running a
single file as we did in the preceding section but does for all but the topmost file
in meatier multifile programs (more on this in a moment).
Python saves its bytecode files in a subdirectory named 
__pycache__
 located in
the directory where your source files reside, and in files whose names identify
the Python version that created them (e.g., 
script0.cpython-312.pyc
 for 3.12).
The 
__pycache__
 subdirectory avoids clutter, and the naming convention for
bytecode files prevents different Python versions installed on the same computer
from overwriting each other’s saved bytecode. We’ll study this bytecode file
model in more detail in 
Chapter 22
, though it’s automatic and irrelevant to most
Python programs and is free to vary among the alternative Python
implementations described ahead.
So why all the bother? In short, Python 
saves bytecode like this as a 
startup-
speed
 optimization. The next time you run your program, Python will load the
.pyc
 files and skip the compilation steps, as long as the bytecode is present, you
haven’t changed your source code since the bytecode was last saved, and you
aren’t running with a different Python than the one that created the bytecode. It

works like this:
Source changes
Python saves 
the last-modified timestamp and size (or hash value,
optionally) of a source code file in its bytecode file, and compares this info
to the source when the bytecode is loaded to know when it must 
recompile—
if
 you edit and resave your source code, its bytecode is re-created the next
time your program is run.
Python versions
Python also adds a version-information suffix to bytecode filenames to know
when it must 
recompile—if
 you run your program on a different Python
implementation or version, its bytecode is generated and saved for that
Python too.
The result is that both source code changes and differing Python versions will
trigger a new bytecode file automatically. If Python 
cannot
 write the bytecode
files to your machine, your 
program still works—the bytecode is generated in
memory and simply discarded on program exit.
Because 
.pyc
 files speed startup time, though, you’ll want to make sure they are
written for larger programs. Bytecode files are also one way to ship Python
programs—Python is happy to run a program if all it can find are compatible
.pyc
 files, even if the original 
.py
 source files are absent. This isn’t as simple as
deleting the 
.py
 files, though, and may require file moves and renames, or special
techniques discussed later in 
Chapter 22
. See Python’s 
compileall
 module to
force compiles when needed for packaging, and frozen binaries (see 
“Standalone
Executables”
) for another shipping option.
Strictly speaking, bytecode is an 
import
 optimization. Bytecode is saved in 
.pyc
files only 
for files that are 
imported
, not for the top-level files of a program that
are only run as scripts. Moreover, a given file is imported and possibly compiled
only 
once
 per program run; later imports use what’s already been loaded. We’ll
explore import basics in 
Chapter 3
 and take a deeper look at imports in 
Part V
.

For now, keep in 
mind that bytecode is never saved for code typed at the
interactive prompt
—a programming mode you’ll learn about in 
Chapter 3
 and
use early in this book.
The Python Virtual Machine (PVM)
Once your program has been compiled to bytecode (or the bytecode has been
loaded from existing 
.pyc
 files), it is 
shipped off for execution to something
generally known as the Python Virtual Machine (PVM, for acronym-inclined
readers). The PVM sounds more impressive than it is; really, it’s not a separate
program, and it need not be installed by itself. In fact, the PVM is just a big code
loop that iterates through your bytecode instructions, one by one, to carry out
their operations. That is, the PVM is the runtime engine in Python. It’s always
present as part of the Python system, is the component that truly runs your
scripts, and is really just 
the last step of the “Python interpreter.”
Figure 2-1
 illustrates this runtime structure. Bear in mind that all of this
complexity is deliberately hidden from Python programmers. Bytecode
compilation is automatic, and the PVM is just part of the Python system that you
have installed on your machine. Again, programmers simply code and run files
of statements, and Python handles the logistics of running them behind the
scenes.
Figure 2-1. 
Python’s traditional execution model: the PVM runs compiled bytecode
Performance implications
Readers with a background in fully compiled languages such as C and C++
might notice some glaring differences in the 
Python model. For one thing, there
is usually no build or “make” step in Python work: code runs immediately after
it is written. For another, Python bytecode is not binary 
machine code
 (e.g.,

instructions for an Intel or ARM chip, known as a 
CPU
): it’s a Python-specific
format. There are exceptions to these rules (e.g., app builds for smartphones can
take some time, and full compilers do exist, as you’ll see ahead), but we’re
focusing on the common here first.
These differences explain why some Python code may not run as fast as C or
C++ code, as described in 
Chapter 1
—the PVM loop, not the CPU chip, still
must interpret the bytecode, and bytecode instructions require more work than
CPU instructions. On the other hand, unlike in classic interpreters, there is still
an internal compile step—Python does not need to reanalyze and reparse each
source statement’s text repeatedly. The net effect is that pure Python code runs at
speeds somewhere between those of a traditional compiled language and a
traditional interpreted language.
Development implications
Another ramification of Python’s execution model is that there is really no
distinction between the development and 
execution environments: the systems
that compile and execute your source code are really one and the same. This
similarity may have a bit more significance to readers with a background in
traditional compiled languages, but in Python, the compiler is always present at
runtime and is part of the system that runs programs.
This makes for a much more 
rapid
 development cycle. There is no need to
precompile and link before execution can begin; simply type and run the code.
This also adds a much more 
dynamic
 flavor to the language—it is possible, and
often very convenient, for Python programs to construct and execute other
Python programs at runtime. The 
eval
 and 
exec
 built-ins, for instance, accept
and run strings containing Python program code. This structure is also why
Python lends itself to product customization—because Python code can be
changed on the fly, users can modify the Python parts of a system on-site
without needing to compile or even possess the rest of the system’s code.
At a more fundamental level, keep in mind that all we really have in Python is
runtime
—there is no initial compile-time phase at all, and everything happens as
the program is running. This even includes operations such as the creation of
functions and classes and the linkage of modules. Such events often occur before
execution in more static languages, but happen during execution in Python. As

you’ll see, this makes for a much more dynamic programming experience than
that to which some readers may be accustomed.
WHY DOES PYTHON USE BYTECODE?
Given that bytecode generally runs more slowly than machine code, this is a
great question. The short answer is that Python 
uses bytecode for the sake of
development speed and language 
flexibility
.
In more detail, every program must ultimately run as machine code on the
host device’s CPU, but program code is just text written per a language’s
rules. Traditional languages like C bridge this gap by constraining code to
accommodate the CPU’s expectations and translating the code’s text to
machine code ahead of time. This makes programs fast, but translation takes
time, and the resulting languages are cumbersome to use.
Python instead defines an easy-to-use language that’s too far removed from
machine code for a direct translation and uses the PVM intermediary to run
your program’s bytecode on the CPU. This is a classic speed-versus-usability
trade-off, but also a false dichotomy: many of the alternative
implementations you’ll meet ahead do compile some Python code to
machine code, and Python is quick enough for many roles even with its
PVM model. For more on this trade-off, see 
“OK, but What’s the
Downside?”
.
Execution-Model Variations
Now that you’ve studied the internal execution flow described in the prior
section, you should also know that it reflects just the standard implementation of
Python today and is not a requirement of the Python language itself. Because of
that, the execution model is prone to change with time. In fact, many systems
already modify the picture in 
Figure 2-1
 in one way or another. Before moving
on, let’s briefly explore the most prominent of these variations.
Python Implementation Alternatives

As of this writing, there are 
multiple implementations of the Python language.
Although there is much cross-fertilization of ideas and work between these
Pythons, each is a separately installed software system, with its own project and
user base. All but one of these systems are optional reading for most Python
beginners, but a quick look at the ways they modify the execution model might
help demystify what it means to run code in general.
The short story is that 
CPython
 is the 
standard implementation—what we’ve
called the “common” version so far. It’s the usual Python on PCs and
smartphones, and the system that most readers will be using (and if you’re not
sure, this probably includes you). This is also the version used in this book,
though the Python language fundamentals presented here apply to all the
alternatives too. All the other Python implementations have specific goals and
may or may not implement the full Python language defined by CPython, but
come close enough to qualify as Pythons.
For example, 
PyPy
 is a drop-in 
replacement for CPython that runs many
programs quicker by compiling parts of them further as they run. 
Jython
 and
IronPython
 instead reimplement CPython to provide access to Java and .NET
components; although standard CPython programs can access such components
too (e.g., via 
pyjnius
 and 
Chaquopy
 for Java), Jython and IronPython aim to be
more seamless. Other options accelerate numeric code, or code in general.
In more detail, the following list is a quick rundown on the most prominent
Python implementations available today—with the usual apologies to current
options omitted for space, and future options omitted for lack of a crystal ball:
CPython: the standard
The original, standard, and reference implementation of Python is usually
called CPython when you want to contrast it with the other options (and just
plain “Python” otherwise). This name comes from the fact that it is coded in
portable ANSI C language code. This is the Python that you fetch from
python.org
 for PCs, get with most alternative distributions and Linux repos,
and have inside Python apps on Android and iOS smartphones. This is also
the flavor whose implementation is captured in 
Figure 2-1
, though this it

prone to change (and in fact may: see 
“Future Possibilities”
).
Jython: Python for Java
The Jython system is an alternative 
implementation of the Python language.
It’s targeted at integration with the Java programming language, much as
CPython integrates with C and C++ components. Jython consists of Java
classes that compile Python source code to Java bytecode, which is then
routed to the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Programmers still code Python
statements in 
.py
 text files as usual; the Jython system essentially just
replaces the rightmost two bubbles in 
Figure 2-1
 with Java-based equivalents
for seamless Java linkage. At this writing, Jython implements the older
Python 2.X not used in this book but is working toward 3.X.
IronPython: Python for .NET
IronPython is another alternative implementation 
of Python. Coded in C#, it
is designed to allow Python programs to integrate with applications written
to work with Microsoft’s .NET Framework for Windows, as well as the
Mono open source equivalent. Like Jython, IronPython replaces the last two
bubbles in 
Figure 2-1
 with equivalents for execution in the .NET
environment. With it, Python code can gain accessibility both to and from
other .NET languages and leverage .NET libraries.
Stackless: Python for concurrency
The Stackless Python system is an enhanced 
version of the standard CPython
language oriented toward concurrency. Because it does not save state on the
C language call stack, Stackless can make Python easier to port to small-
stack architectures. Stackless also provides efficient multiprocessing options
that some find more straightforward than CPython’s later 
async
 coroutines,

and fosters novel programming structures. As an example, the game 
EVE
Online
 uses Stackless Python to achieve high performance for massively
parallel tasks.
PyPy: a JIT compiler for speed
PyPy is a reimplementation of Python for speed. It 
was one of the first
systems to employ a just-in-time (
JIT
) compiler for normal Python code. A
JIT compiler is just an extension to the PVM—the rightmost bubble in
Figure 2-1
—that translates portions of your bytecode all the way to machine
code for faster execution. PyPy does this as your program is running, not in a
prerun compile step, and is able to create type-specific machine code for the
dynamic Python language by keeping track of the data types of the objects
your program processes. By replacing portions of your bytecode this way,
your program runs faster and faster as it is executing. In addition, some
Python programs may also take up less memory under PyPy.
Numba: a JIT compiler for numeric speed
The Numba extension for Python 
adds a JIT compiler that optimizes
numerically oriented code by compiling it all the way to machine code while
your program runs. To direct Numba’s compiler, functions are augmented
with Python “@” decorators supplied with the Numba install. While not all
Python code can be sped up by Numba, it works well for code that uses
NumPy
 arrays and functions, as well as math-oriented loops. Numba also
supports code parallelization paradigms commonly used in scientific
programming.
Shed Skin: an AOT compiler for conforming code
Shed Skin is an ahead-of-time (
AOT
) compiler 
that translates unadorned
Python code to C++ code, which is then compiled to machine code before it

is run. With an AOT, the two rightmost bubbles in 
Figure 2-1
 are replaced
with precompiled machine code. Shed Skin can yield both standalone
programs and extension modules for use in other programs. In exchange, it
implements a restricted subset of Python that requires Python variables to
meet an implicit statically typed constraint and does not support some
Python features or libraries today. Nevertheless, Shed Skin may outperform
both CPython and JIT-based options for some conforming code.
PyThran: an AOT compiler for numeric speed
PyThran implements another AOT compiler 
for a subset of the Python
language, with a focus on scientific programming. Like Shed Skin, it
translates Python code to C++, using static type declarations provided in
either formatted comments or separate command files. The result of
compiling the generated C++ is a native module that can be imported and
used by other Python code.
Cython: a Python/C hybrid for speed
The Cython system defines a Python/C hybrid 
language that combines
Python code with the ability to call C functions and use C type declarations
for variables, parameters, and class attributes. Cython code can be AOT-
compiled to C code that uses the Python/C API, which may then be compiled
completely to machine code. Though not compatible with standard Python,
Cython can be useful both for wrapping external C libraries and for
implementing performance-critical parts of a system as efficient C extensions
for use in CPython programs.
MicroPython: a Python subset for constraints
The MicroPython system is an alternative 
Python with a focus on efficiency.
It implements a limited dialect of the CPython language and a small subset
of its standard library, in order to optimize Python to run in constrained

environments. Though originally targeted at microcontrollers, MicroPython
is also compiled for the 
WebAssembly
 system you’ll meet in 
Chapter 3
, to
support Python programs in web browsers without the full heft of CPython.
And (naturally) more
For other Python alternatives, see the list at 
Python’s wiki
, as well as the
results of a web search. Among the others, 
Cinder
 is a 
performance-focused
implementation of CPython with a JIT compiler and more, created by Meta
and used for Instagram; 
Pyston
 is a fork of CPython with a JIT compiler and
other optimizations, started by Dropbox; and 
Nuitka
 is a free and paid
optimizing AOT compiler that translates standard Python code to C, and is
used by the emerging 
py2wasm
 to translate Python code to 
WebAssembly
 for
use in browsers.
All that being said, unless you have a specific need met only by one of the
alternatives, you’ll probably want to use the standard CPython system. Because
it is the reference implementation of the 
language, it’s always the most complete,
and also tends to be more up-to-date and robust than others. Still, it’s unlikely
that CPython will ever subsume all the optimization projects afoot in the Python
world, so be sure to vet 
the alternatives when your goals gel.
Standalone Executables
Sometimes when people ask for a “real” Python compiler, what they’re actually
seeking is simply a way to generate 
standalone executables from their Python
programs. This is more a packaging and shipping topic than an execution-flow
concept—and of more interest to software developers than Python beginners—
but it’s a related idea.
In short, with the help of third-party tools that you can fetch off the web, it is
possible to turn your Python programs into true self-contained executables,
sometimes also called 
frozen binaries
 in 
the Python world. Whatever they’re
called, these programs can be run without requiring a Python installation or

shipping your source code files.
Standalone executables bundle together the bytecode of your program files,
along with the PVM (interpreter) and any Python support files and libraries your
program needs, into a single package. There are some variations on this theme,
but the end result can be a single 
executable
 (e.g., a 
.exe
 file on Windows) or 
app
(e.g., a 
.app
 on macOS, and 
.apk
 or 
.aab
 on Android) that can easily be shipped
to customers. In 
Figure 2-1
, it is as though the two rightmost bubbles—bytecode
and PVM—are merged into a single component: a standalone executable bundle.
Today, a variety of systems are capable of generating standalone executables and
vary in platforms and features. For example, 
py2exe
 builds standalones for
Windows; 
PyInstaller
 and 
cx_freeze
 make them for Windows, macOS, and
Linux; 
py2app
 creates them for macOS; and 
Buildozer
 and 
Briefcase
 generate
apps for Android and iOS.
Frozen binaries are not the same as the output of a true compiler—they run
bytecode through a virtual machine. Hence, apart from a possible startup
improvement, frozen binaries run at the same speed as the original source files.
Frozen binaries are also not generally small (they contain a PVM), but by current
standards they are not unusually large either. Because Python is embedded in the
frozen bundle, though, it does not have to be installed on the receiving end to run
your program. Moreover, because your bytecode is embedded in the bundle, it
isn’t as easily viewed.
For more details, see the alternative coverage of standalones in this book’s
Appendix A
, which includes tips on building them on multiple platforms from
the same code base.
Future Possibilities
Finally, note that the runtime execution model sketched here is really an artifact
of the current implementation of Python, not of the language itself. For instance,
it’s possible that an AOT compiler for translating unrestricted and unadorned
Python source code to machine code may appear during the shelf life of this
book (although the fact that one has not in over three decades makes this seem
unlikely!), and JIT compilers seem to be cropping up everywhere.
Either way, the bytecode model will likely be standard for some time to come.

The portability and flexibility of bytecode are important features of many Python
systems. Moreover, adding type-constraint declarations to support static
compilation would break much of the flexibility, conciseness, simplicity, and
spirit of Python coding we’re about to explore. Python’s type hinting, also
covered later, comes close, but is thankfully still unused by Python itself today.
NOTE
JIT futurism
: While 
CPython
 currently follows the bytecode/PVM model in 
Figure 2-1
, it may
augment it in the future. Version 3.13, still under development as this is being written, will add
an experimental JIT compiler. As in 
PyPy
 and others, this will translate some bytecode all the
way to machine code as your program is running. In 3.13 it will have a negligible speed boost
and will be disabled by default. Though prescience is perilous in publishing, the JIT compiler
may be enabled by default for CPython in the future if it ever yields a significant net gain for
Python programs.

Chapter Summary
This chapter introduced the execution model of Python—how Python runs your
programs—and explored some common variations on that model designed for
both different roles and better performance. Although you don’t really need to
come to grips with Python internals to write Python scripts, a passing
acquaintance with this chapter’s topics will help you truly understand how your
programs run once you start coding them, as you will in the next chapter. First
though, here’s the usual chapter quiz to review what you’ve learned so far.
Test Your Knowledge: Quiz
1
. 
What is the Python interpreter?
2
. 
What is source code?
3
. 
What is bytecode?
4
. 
What is the PVM?
5
. 
What is machine code?
6
. 
Name two or more variations on Python’s standard execution model.
7
. 
How are CPython, Jython, and IronPython different?
8
. 
What are PyPy, Shed Skin, and Cython?
Test Your Knowledge: Answers
1
. 
The Python interpreter is a program that 
runs the Python programs you
write. It essentially intermediates between your Python instructions and
those available in a CPU’s machine code.
2
. 
Source code is the statements you write for your program. It consists of
text in text files whose names normally end with a 
.py
 extension.

3
. 
Bytecode is the lower-level form of your 
program after Python compiles
it. Python automatically stores bytecode in files with a 
.pyc
 extension
when possible, and automatically re-creates it when needed.
4
. 
The PVM is the Python Virtual Machine—the runtime 
engine of Python
that interprets your compiled bytecode.
5
. 
Machine code is the low-level instructions 
of the underlying CPU on a
computing device like a PC or phone. Because this is what every
program ultimately runs, Python code must be translated to this by a
software layer like the PVM interpreter, or JIT or AOT compilers.
6
. 
Numba, Shed Skin, and standalone 
executables are all variations on the
execution model. In addition, the alternative implementations of Python
named in the next two answers modify the model in some fashion as
well—by replacing bytecode and VMs, or by adding JIT and AOT
compilers.
7
. 
CPython is the standard and 
reference implementation of the language.
Jython and IronPython process Python programs for use in Java and
.NET environments, respectively; they are alternative compilers for
Python.
8
. 
PyPy and Shed Skin are 
reimplementations of Python targeted at speed.
PyPy speeds normal Python programs by using runtime type
information and a JIT compiler to replace some Python bytecode with
machine code as the program runs. Shed Skin speeds programs with an
AOT compiler that translates a restricted subset of Python to C++, from
which it can be fully compiled to machine code to be run as a program
or used in others. Cython 
is a Python/C combination that can be
compiled into machine-code extensions accessible to CPython code.